Okay so JavaScript in the background.
When I ask about the background,
people typically thinks
about something like this,
it's like a mist.
So no one really sees what's going on,
no one is really clear about what's
going on about the background.
In fact, we need to reveal the mystery
because there is a mystery
behind background JavaScript.
So what's going on, what happens,
what happens when you close your app,
when you minimize your app?
So it's not so clear and
we as web developers, typically,
we never care too much about that.
Coz yeah, the website is there and
the website is gone and
it's not so simple, it's not so boolean.
In classic web development, so I've been
in the web space for more than 25 years.
So in classic web development,
actually you were opening the browser or
the user was opening the browser and
then something was there.
So your actual JavaScript code was active
and then at one point the user was
closing the browser or closing the tab or
closing the window and that's all.
So for our mindset,
JavaScript means the user has
that website,
that web uploaded in the browser.
But if that idea is still valid,
because there are so
many situations out there that
sometimes we don't think about and
that will improve user experience,
performance, and
also battery usage on users' devices.
So first, what's background?
How can we define background?
What do you think?
Does anyone has an idea or
definition, what's background?
>> Separate from the main thread.
>> Separate from the main thread,
okay, what else do you think?
>> When the tab is not the one in
the foreground in your browser.
>> When the tab is not in the foreground,
okay, what else?
As you can see that we have two
definitions that are completely different.
So he was talking about the thread,
you were talking about, like OS, Windows.
>> Or
when the browser is not in the foreground.
the browser is not in the foreground.
So yeah, we're going to,
it can be within the browser itself.
Like a background tab, or
it can be within the OS like
the browser is actually
not in the foreground.
And what about if we close the browser?
What happens with our code?
I mean the simple answer is like yeah,
it's killed.
Okay, but it's not so simple.
So in fact, we don't have a definition
of what background means for web apps.
So I mean, if we go for example,
to the W3C, we don't have a definition.
In fact, there are many definitions.
In different specs, you will find
many different definitions of what
background means, which is a problem.
So because it's not completely
clear what background is.
So there are many concepts around.
For example, the W3C,
sometimes it's talking about threading.
Okay, as you said, so a thread or
web worker seems to be
working in the background but
from an OS perspective, is that
the background or is that the thread?
So it's not simple what background means.
That's the first thing that I wanna
mention here, it's not actually simple.
And if we go to the W3C
talking about the specs,
there are many concepts that are actually
close to the idea of a background.
For example, when you hide or
minimize, it can be the tab or
it can be actually the browser.
And typically we think that yeah, things
are in memory and with execution rights.
So my website,
my JavaScript code, my context,
my global context is still in memory.
And because the browser is still there,
the tab is still there, we think that
yeah, we might have execution rights.
So if I have a timer, or if I have a like
an event loop, is it still working?
Then there are other ideas
such as suspend or freeze.
That in this case,
my global context is still in memory but
maybe I don't have execution rights,
so I'm completely frozen.
And then it's the other idea or
names or verbs that we can
find in different specs is that what
happens if we close, if OS kills or
if the browser discards my web content
that now it's not in memory anymore.
Okay, so we will try to
understand all these situations
to actually get a simpler definition for
us for background execution.
So, but I wanna maybe emphasize right now,
that most of the time when we
are talking about the background,
we are mostly talking about being in
the foreground or being in the background.
And that has no direct
relationship with threading.
But it's true that sometimes we talk
about threading when we say, okay,
I want to execute this in the background.
But that means that in this case,
in the case of JavaScript,
you create the web worker.
And if you go to the web worker spec,
you will never see a different
like a mentioned to the background
work when talking about thread.
Anyway, so we will try to simplify it, for
us, because, yeah, the workshop's called
JavaScript in the background, so we need
to actually get some kind of a definition.
So let's say that for now or for us today,
the background is when the user stops or
pauses the usage of the web app.
It can be for many reasons.
Many reasons, and
we will see a lot of different reasons.
But that means that
the user made a decision,
the user is not using the web app anymore.
It can be temporarily or
forever, I don't know.
Actually, the process is really complex,
we're not going to get into this
diagram or to understand that.
By the way, that's the diagram on iOS What
happens with a web app or a PWA on iOS?
All the possibilities, no worries,
we will simplify this but
just to give you an idea all
the possibilities that we have in terms of
background execution or
foreground execution of your code.
So, we will understand what
happened on most situations,
how to handle it properly and how to
increase the opportunity to execute code.
Why do we wanna execute code?
Many reasons we will see a couple okay.
So why should we care about this?
Well, first, to improve user experience,
probably you have seen this in action.
You go to a website, you get out of
the website and you minimize the window,
you go somewhere else.
You come back to the website and
maybe the website is outdated,
the website refreshes itself.
The website was still thinking
that you were there for an hour,
and maybe you have a timer or
even it can be a game, and
the game was still playing
while in the background.
And those are user experience problems
that we can solve if we actually
understand what's going on and
how to improve user experience.
We can also save resources.
That means devices resources,
that's memory,
server resources because for
example we can close socket connections,
we can stop sending data to
the server that we won't use for
example, okay, that by default,
maybe this is still happening.
So you're wasting your server's resources,
not just users resources,
and that means also battery.
So we can stop timers.
If you have a timer that is updating
the UI every minute or every 10 seconds,
you should start thinking about, okay,
on some situations we may wanna stop
the timer for several reasons
that we will see in a minute.
And also to avoid pending requests.
Because sometimes the problem is
that we end up with some kind of
broken transactions.
Because what happens if you
start a fetch to the server?
So you wanna send data to the server,
in the middle of that operation,
the user let's say press
the Home Screen button on the phone.
What happens with that pending request?
Is it still going?
Is it abort?
We don't have control of that and actually
there is no simple answer to that.
Because it depends on the browser,
it depends on OS.
So maybe we wanna get control of
what's going on those situations.
So that's why we care about JavaScript
in the background, and we should care.
Push notification is probably
one of the things that most
people want right now but
because Apple is on finally.
So actually I gave more than
20 Web Push workshops but
those workshops were between 2018 and
2020.
So, the pandemic was also
Apple saying no to Web Push.
So no one cared about web push for
a while for the last few years.
And now that interest is coming back,
because Safari supporting Web Push.
Okay, we'll talk about that later.
And also iOS support for
Web Push is coming next year.